DEM Example 2D Sandpile (#1433)
chaos-polymtl/lethe: doc/source/examples/dem/sandpile-formation/sandpile-formation.rst

.. code-block:: text

    subsection insertion info
      set insertion method                               = volume
      set inserted number of particles at each time step = 250
      set insertion frequency                            = 10000
      set insertion box points coordinates               = -0.34, 0.7 : 0.34, 1.2
      set insertion distance threshold                   = 1.5
      set insertion maximum offset                       = 0.1
      set insertion prn seed                             = 20
    end

.. note::

  Due partly to the bi-dispersed simulation, changing the prn seed to a different value can lead to different results.

Simulation Control
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The simulation runs for 50 seconds of real time. We output the simulation results every 1000 iterations.

.. code-block:: text

    subsection simulation control
      set time step        = 2e-5
      set time end         = 50
      set log frequency    = 1000
      set output frequency = 1000
      set output path      = ./output/
    end

.. note::

  To compare with the results of J.Ai *et al.*, the end time should be set at 50s or at least 35s to see the progression of the curve. 

>   It can be reduced to 15s to see the fully formed sandpile but the height of the pile is only measured after 10s and may continue to decrease after 15s, particularly with the constant rolling resistance model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  It can be reduced to 15 s to see the fully formed sandpile but the height of the pile is only measured after 10 s and may continue to decrease after 15 s, particularly with the constant rolling resistance model.
```

          set x = 0
          set y = 0
        end
        subsection normal vector
          set nx = 0
          set ny = 1
        end
        set start time = 0
        set end time   = 4.5
      end
    end

-----------------------
Running the Simulation
-----------------------

The simulation can be launched with

.. code-block:: text
  :class: copy-button

   mpirun -np 2 lethe-particles sandpile.prm

---------------
Post-processing
---------------

A Python post-processing code called ``sandpile-postprocessing.py`` is provided with this example. It is used to measure the height of the pile at each time set, starting at 10.02s so that the pile is already formed. It also calculates the angle of repose of the pile, based on the last frame.

It compares the data generated by the simulation to data from J.Ai *et al.* [#Ai2010]_ for the selected rolling resistance model.

It is possible to run the post-processing code with the following line. The arguments are the simulation path, the prm file name and the rolling resistance model used.

.. code-block:: text
  :class: copy-button

    python3 sandpile-postprocessing.py  --folder ./ --prm sandpile.prm --rollingmethod epsd

> The code prints the values of R2 and the slope (from the regression) and the angle of repose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code prints the values of the coefficient of determination :math:`R^2`, the slope (from the regression), and the angle of repose.
```

> .. note::

Reviewer: important?

When you have launched the simulation and the post-processing (with the right argument) for each rolling resistance model (constant, epsd, viscous), launch the following to compare different models.

.. code-block:: text
  :class: copy-button

    python3 sandpile-height-comparison.py

-------
Results
-------

Visualisation with Paraview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The simulation can be visualised using Paraview as seen below.

.. figure:: images/formed-sandpile.png
    :width: 400
    :alt: Mesh
    :align: center

    Sandpile at the end of the simulation

Evolution of the Height of the Pile
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following image compares the evolution of the height of the pile with the results of J. Ai *et al.*.

.. image:: images/figure-height-comparison.png
    :alt: Height comparison
    :align: center

The next image shows the evolution of the height of the pile with rolling resistance model epsd using different prn seeds.

.. image:: images/figure-height-different-prn-seeds.png
    :alt: Height comparison
    :align: center

> 

Reviewer: I would maybe add a comment on what you observed here. Explore the results a bit more :)

==================================
Sandpile Formation
==================================

This example simulates the formation of a sandpile using the discrete element method (DEM). 

> The simulation is based on the simulation of J. Ai *et al.* [#Ai2010]_, meant to reproduce the 2D photoelastic sandpile experiments led by Zuriguel *et al.* [#Zuriguel2007]_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is based on the simulation of J. Ai *et al.* [#Ai2010]_, meant to reproduce the 2D photoelastic sandpile experiments led by Zuriguel *et al.* [#Zuriguel2007]_.
```

More information regarding the DEM parameters is given in the Lethe documentation, i.e. `DEM parameters <../../../parameters/dem/dem.html>`_.

----------------------------------
Features
----------------------------------

- Solvers: ``lethe-particles``
- Two-dimensional problem
- Bi-dispersed particles

> - Floating Wall

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Floating wall
```

- Postprocessing using `Python <https://www.python.org/>`_, `PyVista <https://docs.pyvista.org/>`_, `lethe_pyvista_tools <https://github.com/chaos-polymtl/lethe/tree/master/contrib/postprocessing>`_, and `ParaView <https://www.paraview.org/>`_.

----------------------------
Files Used in This Example
----------------------------

All files mentioned below are located in the example's folder (``examples/dem/2d-sandpile-formation``).

- Geometry file: ``sandpile.geo``
- Mesh file: ``sandpile.msh``
- Parameters file: ``sandpile.prm``
- Postprocessing Python script: ``sandpile-postprocessing.py``

-----------------------
Description of the Case
-----------------------

> In the first stage of the simulation (0-4.5s), particles are filled into the hopper. 
> Then, at 4.5s, particles are discharged through a narrow channel onto a flat surface where a pile is formed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the first stage of the simulation (:math:`0-4.5` s), particles are filled into the hopper. 
Then, at :math:`4.5` s, particles are discharged through a narrow channel onto a flat surface where a pile is formed.
```

We compare the evolution of the height of the pile for the different rolling resistance models with the results obtained by J. Ai *et al.* [#Ai2010]_.

> The angle of repose is also calculated, so as to be compared to the one from the experiment conducted by Zuriguel *et al.* [#Zuriguel2007]_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The angle of repose is also calculated, so as to be compared to the one from the experiment conducted by Zuriguel *et al.* [#Zuriguel2007]_
```

> We expect that the Elastic-Plastic Spring-Dashpot model will give closer results to the height and angle from the experiment than the viscous model or the constant torque model. Indeed, the constant torque model produces an oscillation that can prevent the pile from reaching a stable state and the viscous model is not adapted here as the viscous effects are not major.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We expect that the Elastic-Plastic Spring-Dashpot model will give closer results to the height and angle from the experiment than the viscous model or the constant torque model. Indeed, the constant torque model produces an oscillation that can prevent the pile from reaching a stable state and the viscous model is not adapted here as the viscous effects are not sufficient to stabilize the pile at its real height.
```

> We expect that the Elastic-Plastic Spring-Dashpot model will give closer results to the height and angle from the experiment than the viscous model or the constant torque model. Indeed, the constant torque model produces an oscillation that can prevent the pile from reaching a stable state and the viscous model is not adapted here as the viscous effects are not major.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We expect that the Elastic-Plastic Spring-Dashpot (EPSD) model will give closer results to the height and angle from the experiment than the viscous model or the constant torque model. Indeed, the constant torque model produces an oscillation that can prevent the pile from reaching a stable state and the viscous model is not adapted here as the viscous effects are not major.
```

--------------
Parameter File
--------------

Mesh
~~~~

The mesh is a hopper with 50.5° angle generated with GMSH, with a channel connecting the hopper to the part with the flat surface.

> The geometry follows the one used by Zuriguel *et al.* [#Zuriguel2007]_ and was handled in order to generate a structured mesh.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The geometry follows the one used by Zuriguel *et al.* [#Zuriguel2007]_ and the mesh generated with gmsh is structured.
```

.. code-block:: text

    subsection mesh
      set type                = gmsh
      set file name           = ./sandpile.msh
      set check diamond cells = true
      set initial refinement  = 1
    end

.. figure:: images/mesh-sandpile.png
    :width: 500
    :alt: Mesh
    :align: center

    2D mesh of the hopper

.. note::

  The mesh can be generated using the following line:

>    .. code-block:: bash
>       :class: copy-button
> 
>       gmsh -2 sandpile.geo

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  .. code-block:: text
    :class: copy-button

    gmsh -2 sandpile.geo
```

Lagrangian Physical Properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The 3000 particles are bi-dispersed, with 2500 having a diameter of 6.9 mm and 500 having a diameter of 8.9 mm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :math:`3000` particles are bi-dispersed, with :math:`2500` having a diameter of math:`6.9` mm and :math:`500` having a diameter of :math:`8.9` mm.
```

The following properties are chosen according to the J. Ai *et al.* paper:

* Custom distribution of disks with 70% of disks with a 6.9 mm diameter and 30% with an 8.9 mm diameter

> * Density (1056 :math:`kg/m^3`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Density (:math:`1056\;\text{kg}/\text{m}^3`)
```

* Young's modulus (4 MPa)
* Poisson's ratio (0.49)
* Friction coefficient of particle-particle (0.8)
* Rolling resistance coefficient of particle-particle (0.3)

> The same properties were given to the wall as they were not specified.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The same properties were given to the wall as they were not specified in the original article.
```

.. code-block:: text

    subsection lagrangian physical properties
      set g                        = 0.0, -9.81
      set number of particle types = 1
      subsection particle type 0
        set size distribution type            = custom
        set custom diameters                  = 0.0069 , 0.0089
        set custom volume fractions           = 0.7   , 0.3
        set number of particles               = 3000
        set density particles                 = 1056
        set young modulus particles           = 4000000
        set poisson ratio particles           = 0.49
        set restitution coefficient particles = 0.7
        set friction coefficient particles    = 0.8
        set rolling friction particles        = 0.3
      end
      set young modulus wall           = 4000000
      set poisson ratio wall           = 0.49
      set restitution coefficient wall = 0.7
      set friction coefficient wall    = 0.8
      set rolling friction wall        = 0.3
    end

.. note::

>   Only the value of the restitution coefficient was not given in the paper.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Only the value of the restitution coefficient was not given in the reference paper.
```

Do  you have a rationale for the value you chose? Just a quick indication. Otherwise, if it did not have an impact, just state it :).

Model Parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: text

    subsection model parameters
      subsection contact detection
        set contact detection method                = dynamic
        set dynamic contact search size coefficient = 0.8
        set neighborhood threshold                  = 1.3
      end
      set particle particle contact force method = hertz_mindlin_limit_overlap
      set particle wall contact force method     = nonlinear
      set integration method                     = velocity_verlet
      set rolling resistance torque method       = epsd_resistance
      set f coefficient                          = 0.0 
    end

.. note::

>   Only when the Elastic-Plastic Spring-Dashpot (epsd) rolling resistance model is selected should f be specified (f=0 here).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Only when the EPSD rolling resistance model is selected should the ``f coefficient`` be specified (``f coefficient = 0.0`` here)..
```

>   More information regarding the DEM Model parameters is given in the Lethe documentation, i.e. `DEM Model Parameters <../../../parameters/dem/model_parameters.html>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  More information regarding the DEM model parameters is given in the Lethe documentation, i.e. `DEM Model Parameters <../../../parameters/dem/model_parameters.html>`_.
```

Particle Insertion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Particles are inserted in an insertion box in the upper part of the hopper. In this simulation, the hopper is filled through 12 insertion steps.

.. code-block:: text

    subsection insertion info
      set insertion method                               = volume
      set inserted number of particles at each time step = 250
      set insertion frequency                            = 10000
      set insertion box points coordinates               = -0.34, 0.7 : 0.34, 1.2
      set insertion distance threshold                   = 1.5
      set insertion maximum offset                       = 0.1
      set insertion prn seed                             = 20
    end

.. note::

>   Due partly to the bi-dispersed simulation, changing the prn seed to a different value can lead to different results.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Due partly to the bi-dispersed partic,le size distribution, changing the prn seed to a different value can lead to different results since it changes the initial configuration of the particles.
```

Simulation Control
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The simulation runs for 50 seconds of real time. We output the simulation results every 1000 iterations.

.. code-block:: text

    subsection simulation control
      set time step        = 2e-5
      set time end         = 50
      set log frequency    = 1000
      set output frequency = 1000
      set output path      = ./output/
    end

.. note::

  To compare with the results of J.Ai *et al.*, the end time should be set at 50 s or at least 35 s to see the progression of the curve. 
  It can be reduced to 15 s to see the fully formed sandpile but the height of the pile is only measured after 10 s and may continue to decrease after 15 s, particularly with the constant rolling resistance model.

> Floating Walls

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Floating Wall
```

.. important::

    You need to ensure that ``lethe_pyvista_tools`` is working on your machine. Click `here <../../../tools/postprocessing/postprocessing.html>`_ for details.

When you have launched the simulation and the post-processing (with the right argument) for each rolling resistance model (constant, epsd, viscous), launch the following to compare different models.

.. code-block:: text
  :class: copy-button

    python3 sandpile-height-comparison.py

-------
Results
-------

Visualisation with Paraview
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The simulation can be visualised using Paraview as seen below.

.. figure:: images/formed-sandpile.png
    :width: 600
    :alt: Mesh
    :align: center

    Sandpile at the end of the simulation

Evolution of the Height of the Pile
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following image compares the evolution of the height of the pile with the results of J. Ai *et al.*.

.. figure:: images/figure-height-comparison.png
    :width: 500
    :alt: Height comparison
    :align: center

Considering the height of the pile measured in the experiment by Zuriguel *et al.* was 28 cm, the results with model epsd are satisfying.

> As predicted, with the constant model, the pile takes a lot of time to stabilise but results are closed to those obtained by J. Ai *et al*. Regarding the viscous model, the pile does remain constant like with epsd but the height is underestimated.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As predicted, with the constant model, the pile takes a lot of time to stabilise but results are closed to those obtained by J. Ai *et al*. Regarding the viscous model, the pile does remain constant like with the epsd model but the height is lower than what is observed in the experiments.
```
